Hello.
I'm Professor Brian Bushee.
Welcome back.
In this video we're gonna do a quick
review of the three financial statements.
This video is optional.
If you've just taken a financial
accounting course or
you do financial accounting for a living,
you don't need to watch this video.
And if you've never seen
financial accounting before,
you don't need to watch this video either.
You need to go probably go take
a financial accounting course first before
you take this course.
But, if you know financial accounting but
it's been awhile, you wanna review
the terminology, brush up on your
knowledge, then this is the video for you.
Let's get started.
Let's start with a quick overview of
the required financial statements.
We'll talk about each one in
a little more detail in a second.
First, we have the balance sheet, which
is the statement of financial position.
Which means it lists all of
the company's resources and
obligations on a specific date.
Here's where we can see assets equals
liabilities plus stockholder's equity.
This is the equation that governs
everything in accounting, and
it must always be in balance.
Then, we get an income statement
which shows the results of
operations over a period of time.
By over a period of time I mean
between two balance sheets.
So, maybe over a quarter, or over a year,
using something called accrual accounting
which is where recognition is tied to
business activities, not to cash flows.
And this is where we can see net income,
also known as earnings, or
net profit,
which equals revenues minus expenses.
And the third major statement we're gonna
use is the statement of cash flows.
This shows all these sources and
uses of cash over a period of time
split up into operating,
investing and financing activities.
>> Mr. Professor, I learned a ton
of accounting in Montessori school.
But shouldn't you explain this
stuff more for those who didn't?
>> Just to reiterate
what I said in the intro,
the goal of this course is not to
teach you financial accounting.
There are other courses
out there that do that.
Rather, the goal of this course is to
teach you to do interesting analytics
with your knowledge of
financial accounting.
So, if you are really lost at this point,
you probably want to go take an intro to
financial accounting first,
then come back and take this course.
I'll still be here.
Now, let's review the balance
sheet in more detail.
So, we have assets, which are resources
owned by the business that are expected to
provide future economic benefits.
By that we mean they'll either provide
cash coming in in the future, or
they'll save the company from
having to spend cash in the future.
Liabilities are claims on assets by
creditors who are non-owners that
represents some obligation to make future
payment of cash, goods, or services.
And stockholders equity is the claim on
the assets by the owners of the business.
So, we have the balance sheet equation
that assets equal liabilities plus
stockholders equity,
which means that your resources,
assets, equal claims on those
resources by outsiders, creditors.
And then, claims by the owners,
stockholders equity.
Stockholders equity is made
up of a couple components.
First of all, there's contributed capital.
This is the common stock, or
additional paying capital,
that arises when the company
sells shares of stock.
And retained earnings, which arise when
the company operates the business.
Retained earnings are increased by
revenues, which is what you get
when the company delivers goods or
services to its customers.
They're decreased by expenses, which are
the costs of generating those revenues.
Also, decreased by dividends,
which are decisions to pay out either
cash or stock to shareholders.
>> [FOREIGN] Are you going to talk
about Par Value again in this course?
>> If you've taken my Intro to
Financial Accounting course,
you know there's this guy who always
likes to ask me about Par Value.
Looks like he's back again.
But have no fear, I will not be talking
about Par Value at all in this course.
Let's take a quick look at
the balance sheet for a real company.
This is the 3M company, and this is
the asset side of their balance sheet.
Starts with cash plus short-term
marketable securities,
which should pay off within the next year.
Then, there's accounts receivable.
This is the amount owed by customers.
So, we've recorded sales in the past, and
this is how much cash we're gonna
collect from them in the future.
Inventories are the cost of all
the goods that are available for
sale split up into the cost
of goods that are finished,
finished goods, the cost of goods that
are in the process of being produced,
work in process, and the cost of
all our raw materials and supplies.
Other current assets,
these are operating costs paid in advance.
So, maybe you paid rent or insurance
in advance of using up the rent, or
using up the insurance.
So, we have this other current
asset to represent that.
Then, we have non current assets.
These are assets beyond one year.
So, marketable securities and investments.
Property plant and equipment.
We show the original cost.
Then, the accumulated depreciation, which
is how much of that original cost has been
recognized in income as an expense.
And we'll talk about that in a little bit.
Then, we have goodwill and
intangible assets.
So, goodwill is the premium that
3M is paid in acquisitions.
And in tangible assets are contractual
rights like patents or trademarks.
Here's the liability and
stockholders equity side of
the 3M company balance sheet.
Starts with current liabilities.
These are obligations due within the next
year starting with short term debt.
Then, accounts payable.
This is amount owed to suppliers
on purchases that we've made.
So, we've received stuff
from suppliers in the past,
now we owe this cash in the future.
Then, there's a bunch of other payables,
or what are called accruals.
These are operating costs like salaries or
income taxes that we've
recognized an expense.
And we owe those people
the money in the future.
Below current liabilities,
we have long term debt.
So, debt that's due beyond a year.
And then, longer term pension benefits and
other long term liabilities.
Stockholders equity.
We have common stock and paid in capital.
That's what shows up when we
issue stock to our investors.
Retained earnings is the sum of all
the prior net income that 3M has
earned minus any dividends
that they paid out.
The rest of the stuff we're
not going to talk about.
Treasury stock is when they
repurchase their own stock.
And then, I'm definitely not gonna talk
about accumulated other comprehensive
income at this point.
But that's what the balance
sheet looks like.
And as you notice,
the assets equal liabilities and equity.
Next, let's review the income statement.
So, on the income statement
we'll see revenues,
which are increases in stockholders
equity from providing goods and services.
These will also be called sales or
credits or gains.
>> Stockholders equity?
What are you talking about?
Why isn't a revenue an increase in cash?
>> Good question.
This is a pretty fundamental
point of financial accounting.
So, let's take a little bit to review it.
Revenue is recognized when companies
deliver the goods to customers,
not necessarily when they get paid cash.
So, the company delivers the goods, but
then gives the customer an invoice
to get paid in 30 days.
We create an accounts receivable between
the time we recognize the revenue and
when we collect the cash.
Or sometimes companies will receive
cash before delivering the goods.
So they get a deposit.
So, they'll create a liability called
unearned revenue between the time they
receive the cash and deliver the goods.
But in both cases the revenue will be
recognized when the goods are delivered,
not when cash is gonna be received.
And that's a fundamental point for accrual
accounting, is that we recognize revenues
and expenses based on business activities,
not based on cash flow.
Which is why it's an increase
in stockholder's equity and
not necessarily an increase in cash.
Next, we have expenses,
which are decreases in stockholders
equity that incurred in the process
of generating revenues.
These are also called provisions or
charges or losses.
And then, net income,
which is also known as earnings or
net profit,
which is these revenues minus expenses.
Does not equal the change in cash because
we're gonna recognize revenues and
expenses based on business activities, not
based on cash coming in or cash going out.
Here's the Income Statement for
3M company.
Starts at the top with net sales.
So, that's the revenue which is the value
of goods delivered to customers during
the period using the selling price.
Cost of sales,
also known as cost of goods sold.
That's the cost of goods that were
delivered to customers during the period
using the historical cost
of manufacturing the goods.
Selling general and
administrative expenses.
These are all the operating
expenses incurred the period.
So things like the cost of
your sales force, marketing,
top management, admin, and so forth.
Research and development expenses.
Self-explanatory.
The cost of research and
development activity during the period.
And then, that gives us operating income,
which you can think of as
the profitability from
the core business of 3M.
Below that, we include interest expense
and interest income during the period.
The provision or expense for income taxes.
And then, at the bottom,
the net income attributable to 3M.
You can ignore
the non-controlling interest.
It's not something we're gonna talk about.
Instead, we're gonna focus on this bottom
line net income attributable to 3M.
Finally, we have
the statement of cash flow,
which is gonna summarize all of the cash
transactions during the period split
up into operating activities which are
transactions related to providing goods or
services and
other normal business activities.
Investing activities, which
are transactions related to a acquiring or
disposing of long-lived assets
like property plant equipment.
And financing activities, which
are transactions related to owners or
creditors.
So, here's the cash flow statement for
the 3M Company.
I'm not gonna go through the whole thing
because if you've taken prior courses,
you know this is really hard and
complicated to put together.
The numbers that we're gonna need for
this course are the net cash
provided by operating activities.
So, again,
that's cash coming in from customers,
cash we're paying out to suppliers,
employees, or other vendors.
Cash used in investing activities.
This is the cash spent on capital
expenditures, or acquiring other
companies, or buying marketable
securities, less any disposals of those.
And finally,
the cash used in financing activities.
We get cash from financing activities
when we issue stock or we borrow money.
We pay out cash for financing
activities when we pay back debt,
when we buy back our stock, or
when we pay dividends to shareholders.
So, the total cash changed during the year
is split up into these three categories.
That wraps up our quick review
of the financial statements.
Now that we know all the wonderful
information that are in those financials,
we can start doing some really
interesting stuff with it.
I'll see you next time.
>> See you next video.